# Lecture 6 - Notes  

**January 21, 2016**  

## Link Characteristics

* __Speed__: Bits per second
* __Delay__: Milliseconds
    * __Transmission Delay__: $\frac{\text{Packet Length}}{\text{Link Speed}}$ 
    * __Propagation Delay__: $\frac{\text{Travel Distance}}{\text{Signal Speed}}$ 
    * __Processing Delay__: Magic 
    * __Queueing Delay__: Complicated
* __Loss__: Percentage
    * Transmission Error
    * Network Congestion

## Link Layer

* Service Provided by the Physical Layer
    * Bit delivery 
* Service Provided to the Network Layer
    * Frame delivery
    * Error control
    * Flow control
    * Medium Access

| Layer    | Units  |
|----------|--------|
| Network  | Packet |
| Link     | Frame  |
| Physical | Bits   |

## Packet Framing

__[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_packet#Packet_framing)__

_definition_: Networks use __Packet Framing__ to format data during transmission. It can be thought of as the envelope for a letter and contains addressing data as well as checksums for error checking.

### Byte Stuffing

__[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistent_Overhead_Byte_Stuffing)__

_definition_: When transmitting data using packet framing the data portion must be delimited. It is ofter _zero_ delimited. __Byte Stuffing__ is a way we escape the zero's already inside the data.

With __bit stuffing__ we can define a bit sequence as the escape sequence.


## Error Control

How can we make sure the frames makes it to the other end correctly?

* __Frame Order__: Added to the frames
* __Lost Frames__: Wait for Timeout
* __Frame Correctness__: Add check bits

### Hamming Distance

We can create codewords,

$$
    \underbrace{m ~\text{bits}}_\text{data} + \underbrace{r ~\text{bits}}_\text{check} = \underbrace{n ~\text{bits}}_\text{codeword}
$$ 

These codewords can be generated a number of ways for checking the validity of data. A naive approach might be duplicating our data. For example if our data was $010$ then our check would also be $010$.

The __Hamming Distance__ of codewords $a$ and $b$ is the number of pairwise different bits. This distance of a codeword set is the smallest hamming distance in the set. If our set has distance $d$ then we can detect $d-1$ bits of error and correct,

$$
    \left\lfloor \frac{d-1}{2} \right\rfloor ~\text{bits}
$$

of error.

##### Example

If our generation scheme is to replicate the data once, like above, and we have two bits of data (for simplicity),

|        | $0000$ | $0101$ | $1010$ | $1111$ |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| $0000$ | N/A    | $d=2$  | $d=2$  | $d=4$  |
| $0101$ | $d=2$  | N/A    | $d=4$  | $d=2$  |
| $1010$ | $d=2$  | $d=4$  | N/A    | $d=2$  |
| $1111$ | $d=4$  | $d=2$  | $d=2$  | N/A    |

we can see the codeword set has a hamming distance of $d = 2$ so we can detect $1$ bit of error and correct no bits.

##### Example

If our generation scheme is instead to replicate the data twice, and we still have two bits of data,

|          | $000000$ | $010101$ | $101010$ | $111111$ |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| $000000$ | N/A      | $d=3$    | $d=3$    | $d=6$    |
| $010101$ | $d=3$    | N/A      | $d=6$    | $d=3$    |
| $101010$ | $d=3$    | $d=6$    | N/A      | $d=3$    |
| $111111$ | $d=6$    | $d=3$    | $d=3$    | N/A      |

we can see the codeword set has a hamming distance of $d = 3$ so we can detect $2$ bit of error and correct,

$$\begin{align}
    \left\lfloor \frac{d-1}{2} \right\rfloor ~\text{bits} &= \left\lfloor \frac{3-1}{2} \right\rfloor ~\text{bits} \newline
    &= 1 ~\text{bits}
\end{align}$$

### Multi Dimensional Parity Check Code

__From [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multidimensional_parity-check_code)__

The two-dimensional parity-check code, usually called the optimal rectangular code, is the most popular form of multidimensional parity-check code.

Assume that the goal is to transmit the four-digit message "1234", using a two-dimensional parity scheme. First the digits of the message are arranged in a rectangular pattern:

|           | Column 1 | Column 2 |
|:---------:|:--------:|:--------:|
| __Row 1__ |     1    |     2    |
| __Row 2__ |     3    |     4    |

Parity digits are then calculated by summing each column and row separately:

|            | Column 1 | Column 2 | Parity |
|:----------:|:--------:|:--------:|:------:|
|  __Row 1__ |     1    |     2    |  __3__ |
|  __Row 2__ |     3    |     4    |  __7__ |
| __Parity__ |   __4__  |   __6__  |        |

The eight-digit sequence "12334746" is the message that is actually transmitted. If any single error occurs during transmission then this error can not only be detected but can also be corrected as well. Let us suppose that the received message contained an error in the first digit. The receiver rearranges the message into the grid:

|            | Column 1 | Column 2 | Parity |
|:----------:|:--------:|:--------:|:------:|
|  __Row 1__ |    _9_   |     2    |  __3__ |
|  __Row 2__ |     3    |     4    |  __7__ |
| __Parity__ |   __4__  |   __6__  |        |

The receiver can see that the first row and also the first column add up incorrectly. Using this knowledge and the assumption that only one error occurred, the receiver can correct the error. In order to handle two errors, a 4-dimensional scheme would be required, at the cost of more parity digits. 
