# Lecture 2 - Notes
**January 7, 2016**

## Overview of Networks

### What is a network?

* End Systems, e.g., computers, phones, servers.
* Communication Links, e.g., cell broadcasts, broadband
* Intermediate Systems, e.g., routers, switches

### Types of Networks

* __Broadcast__
    * Cable TV
* __Switched__
    * Circuit Switching
        * Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
    * Packet Switching
        * The Internet

## Packet Switching

_definition_: __Packet switching__ is a method of transmitting data where the data is transformed into chunks --- called packets --- which are then shared across a network. Some properties of packet switching are

* Each packet contains an address that directs the packet to its destination
* A channel is occupied during the transmission of the packet only, and upon completion of the transmission the channel is made available for the transfer of other traffic
* Increases network efficiency by allowing data to be transmitted between multiple start and end points along the same connection in the network

### Types of Delay

#### Propagation Delay

_definition_: The __propagation delay__ is the amount of time that it takes for the head of the packet to reach its destination.

$$
    d_{prop} = \frac{d}{s}
$$

where $d$ is the distance between the nodes and $s$ is the speed.

#### Queueing Delay

_definition_: The __queueing delay__ is the time that a packet waits in a queue before being able to be processed. _It is the least predictable delay_ and is based on the number of packets being sent at a particular time.

#### Processing Delay

_definition_: The _processing delay_ the time it takes for a router to process the packet header, _i.e_, The time it takes to decide where the packet needs to go, to look for errors and to decrypt and encrypt the packet.

#### Transmission Delay (Store-And-Forward Delay)

_definition_: The __transmission delay__ is the time that it takes for a packet's bits to be sent into the channel. It happens because it takes time to put the bits of a packet on the channel before those bits are actually sent and is very dependant on the packets size. The transmission delay can be expressed as,

$$
    d_{trans} = \frac{L}{R}
$$

where $L$ is the number of bits and $R$ is the rate of transmission (often in bits per second).

#### End-To-End Delay

The total amount of time for a packet to reach its destination is

$$
    d_\text{end to end} = d_\text{transmission} + d_\text{propagation} + d_\text{processing} + d_\text{queue}
$$

#### Example

You have a packet that is 7.5 Mbits which goes through 3 routers and each router processes at 1.5 Mbps.

$$
    \underset{\text{routers}}3 \cdot
    \frac
    {
    7.5 ~\text{Megabits}
    }
    {\left(
    \frac{1.5 ~\text{Megabits}}{\text{Second}}
    \right)}
     = 15 ~\text{seconds}
$$

So the total transmission time is 15 seconds
